[] From Joan Rater, one of the writers of "Deterioration of the Fight or
Flight Response" (hour 1 of the 2 hour finale)

Original Airdate: May 15, 2006 (Note: The second hour of the two hour
finale, titled "Losing My Religion," was written by Shonda, and she will
be sharing her thoughts on that one herself in a bit...)

I know, I know, I KNOW!!!!!! Denny's dead and it sucks. More than sucks.
Blows. Feels awful and empty and seriously, why couldn't Denny have
lived?

Well, if you'd been hanging around the Writer's Room in March you would
have heard the writers asking that very question, day after day. Does
Denny really have to die? There was one particular day when most of the
writers had decided that Denny couldn't die. He had to live. Seriously.
Why not? And when Shonda came into the Writer's Room and Krista said,
"Does Denny have to die?", I think Shonda's head almost exploded because
it was about the 12th person that day who had asked the very same
question. And here's the thing. The person who wanted Denny to live the
MOST is Shonda. We all love Denny because he's so charming and Denny-ish
and the actor is even more charming and Jeffrey-ish, but let me tell you
there was no one more tortured and torn up about it than Shonda. So you
say to yourself, okay, you're the writers, you could have saved him if
you wanted to. But we couldn't. Denny had to die. And not for plot
reasons or anything like that, it's just ... it's hard to explain. As
bad as it felt, it also felt right. "Right" is so the wrong word, but it
felt inevitable. But since Denny didn't die until hour two, and Tony and
I wrote hour one, I'll leave it to Shonda to talk more about Denny ...

What I really want to talk about is you guys. The fans. I mean, we all
know it was one hell of an emotional roller coaster, these last three
episodes. And a lot of things are still up in the air ... Mer/Der/Finn
in particular. I watched last night with my nieces and nephew who
literally were begging me for something, anything about next season. I
so wanted to tell them that no matter what happens with Izzie, or who
Meredith picks, it's all going to be alright (I'm a mother, I have 2
kids, so I'm inclined to want to make it all better and for there to be
band-aids put on skinned knees and happy endings at the end of stories).
But before I became a mother, I was a single woman living in New York
City through most of my twenties. And I know from experience that before
the happy ending there's a lot of bad choices, bad luck, one night
stands and tequila. Not to mention amazing, magical times that make all
those bad choices and one night stands worth it. Your twenties are when
you figure out who you are, and what matters to you. You're forming
friendships that will sustain you. You're making plans. Looking for your
soulmate. Wondering if there is such a thing as a soulmate. These
interns are struggling with all that while learning to be surgeons. I
started this paragraph saying I wanted to talk about you guys, the fans,
and I ended up talking about myself (something Tony says I do a lot). I
guess it's because when I read your comments, I can relate. I might not
agree, but I usually get and appreciate how you feel and where you're
coming from, even if it's an angry rant about how dare we kill Denny.
Seriously, you guys, we feel it too. All we're trying to do is do right
by these characters, and write stuff we'd want to watch.

So I'll leave you with what I told my nieces and nephew last night about
next season: It's gonna be great. You'll laugh ... and cry ... and hate
our characters one minute ... and love them the next. And throw things
at your TV.

And we'll keep doing our best to bring you stories about the messiness
of being human.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
