[] Stacy McKee on "These Ties That Bind"...

Original Airdate: 11-13-08

I have this vase. It has its very own spot, right in the center of my
breakfast room table, directly in front of the window, where the light
will shine through it. It's beautiful -- Murano glass with multicolored
stripes of orange and yellow and pink and blue... I love this vase. It
was an engagement gift, and it's one of a kind. Irreplaceable. And a few
weeks ago, my kitten figured out how to jump up onto my breakfast room
table (but he couldn't figure out how to STAY on the table) so my new
little kitten skidded all the way across the top of the table and
crashed onto the floor below... taking my vase with him.

I jumped into action -- first making sure my kitten wasn't hurt, then
starting the task of carefully sweeping up every last shard of broken
glass... Only, as I stood there, broom in hand, staring down at all
those beautiful broken shards, I started to cry. And cry. And cry and
cry and cry and cry and pretty soon my husband was there, trying to
figure out how I could possibly be sobbing -- SOBBING -- over what was,
let's face it, a PIECE OF GLASS. And through my crazy, slightly manic
tears, I managed to blurt out that it wasn't just a piece of glass! It
was a beautiful vase. A beautiful vase that made me happy every time I
looked at it and that was important because sometimes we all need
reminders of things that make us happy. That vase was from a time in our
life when things were new and bright and just beginning and now it's
gone. The vase is gone forever, there's no way to bring it back. I felt
connected to that vase, and I already missed it. I MISSED THE DAMN VASE.

Is what I said. Through my tears. Gesturing with my broom. Which was
pretty ridiculous. Only, not -- because what you don't know is that over
the summer, my dad passed away. Then a couple of weeks later, my cat
passed away. Which is the only reason I have a new kitten in the first
place. And the truth is -- this was probably the first time I'd really
-- REALLY -- let myself cry. I finally let myself start to feel that
incredible mish mash of feelings we all have when we lose people who are
important to us. I was crying for all the loss I'd been feeling for
months. And it took a shattered vase to help me let it out.

In Callie Torres's case... all it takes is some shattered bones.

I know, I know -- Hahn isn't dead. But she IS gone. And Callie is
feeling it -- sort of. Callie's diving into work. She wants bones to
break, skeletons to build, SOMETHING to keep her from thinking about
Erica. Erica played an unbelievably important role in Callie's life;
Erica's relationship with Callie has completely redefined how Callie
sees herself. That's something you can't undo. Erica's departure has
left Callie with this big gaping hole that she has no idea how to fill.
Callie had just started to figure out her own feelings, her own identity
and now -- Hahn's gone. Without a goodbye. Whether or not Callie and
Erica were ever soul mates, you can't deny that they played
irreplaceable roles in each other's lives. The heartbreak that Callie is
feeling is very very real. And very very private until -- she starts to
cry, and cry and cry and cry, in the OR, over the bones that she built
from scratch. She's crying for all the loss and heartbreak and sadness
she hasn't allowed herself to really feel yet. Which is why it's so
lovely that Callie's friends -- Yang, Sloan, and even Owen -- recognize
the moment for what it is and try to give her the privacy she needs to
mourn.

Kinda like me with my vase. Only, Sara Ramirez looks WAY more glamorous
than me when she cries.

Callie isn't the only one feeling a lack of connection. It's clear that
Owen is having difficulty adjusting to life at SGH. He calls in Derek
and Mark for help, then disregards their concerns about his patient. I
love watching Owen's face when he's listening to his patient's story,
about how somewhere along the way the patient just lost the ability to
connect. It's clear that it resonates with Owen, and it's only after
that moment that he really becomes receptive to Derek. And I think that
it's because of that moment that Owen goes in for that kiss with
Cristina... Owen doesn't want to lose his ability to connect with other
people. But, obviously, he's having some difficulty connecting
gracefully -- that kiss isn't soft or romantic. It's a little desperate
--- at least at first.

What's nice is that Cristina seems to recognize this. And even though
she walks away from Owen in the end, there's no judgment there. It's
just that she doesn't quite know what to do with all the feelings she's
feeling...

Which brings me to Cristina. And how displaced she's got to be feeling
in this episode... because of Sadie. Meredith's Pre-Cristina Cristina.
Sadie knew Meredith back when Mer was traveling around Europe. Back when
Mer was a little wilder and a little crazier (What? You think a girl who
can throw back multiple tequila shots and perform surgery the next day
doesn't have a past?) Back when, apparently, Meredith's nickname was
Death. Sadie shares history with Meredith that Cristina can't. She's
connected to Meredith in a way that Cristina never can be... and that's
uncomfortable for Cristina. She doesn't like to share -- she especially
doesn't like to share her person.

One story I love in this episode involves Meredith and her other person
-- Derek. Meredith and Derek are as healthy and happy as we've ever seen
them. And what I love is that they are functioning the way solid, happy
couples function. In this case, Derek sees a chance for Meredith to
connect with her sister, he encourages her to do so -- and it works.
Once Meredith talks to Lexie, she does get worried about her little
sister's well being, and enlists Derek's help keeping Little Sloan out
of Little Grey.

Which, by the way, really IS one of the most ridiculous things any grown
man (especially Derek Shepherd) could say to one another man. And that
makes it all the more sweet that Derek is perfectly willing to say it to
Mark Sloan. He does it for Meredith. Which makes me love him for loving
her so completely.

In an episode about connection, I also love that we introduce a
character whose very identity is wrapped up in the fact that she has
difficulty connecting with the people around her. Dixon (played
beautifully by Mary McDonnell) has Aspergers syndrome, which is a mild
form of autism. This doesn't keep her from being an incredible surgeon;
in fact, her obsessive interest in the human heart is probably the very
thing that has helped her master it. But her condition does keep her
from being able to communicate with patients or with our doctors in a
way that we're use to... The moment in the elevator, when Bailey finally
realizes why Dixon is the way she is... Couldn't love it more. Because
it's so rare that Bailey, of all our characters, ever oversteps. Only
it's so clear that she has and that she's ashamed of it.

And then, of course, there's Izzie. Who is clearly still connected to
Denny, even beyond the grave...

Here's what I'll say about Denny.

I want you to take a moment, and just think for a second. About what you
would do if someone you lost, who was unbelievably important to you,
suddenly showed up in your room. Right now. While you're sitting at your
computer and reading this blog and suddenly feeling a chill on the back
of your neck and hearing, from behind you, in a familiar voice: "Hi."
It's someone -- your lover, your parent, your grandparent, your best
friend, your ex-fianc√©e... someone you thought was gone forever and
suddenly now they are right there. Standing next to you. Asking you to
talk to them, asking you to hold their hand.

Sure, at first you'd be scared and freaked out and seriously considering
the possibility that you might very well be crazy... but in the next
moment, what would you do? You have wished every day since that person
left that you could see them, touch them, just one more time. What would
you do?

I know what I'd do. I'd take my dead dad's hand. And we'd sit there and
stay up all night talking about all the things we never got a chance to
talk about. And I wouldn't care if he was dead or if I was crazy because
it would be so great just to hear his voice again.

So, can you imagine, if you were Izzie, what you might do if Denny
suddenly appeared to you? And after trying to ignore him, and trying to
say goodbye to him, and even after BURNING his fricking sweater, he was
STILL there...

All I'm saying is... maybe this is one connection that gets to defy all
logic and common sense and, instead, maybe it just gets to be. Even if
it does seem too good to be true.

Like the new vase that magically appeared on my desk the other day. I
walked into my office and there it was. Just like new. Like magic.
(Turns out my husband secretly contacted the glass factory in Venice
that made my vase, found their one local retailer in the states, and --
amazingly -- was able to track down an almost near replica of the very
vase my kitten shattered. He snuck into my office in the middle of my
work day and left it there for me.) But to me it was magic. My magical
Murano vase, back from the dead. And in that moment, for so so many
reasons, I'd never been so happy.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
