[] Meg Marinis on "Hook, Line and Sinner"...

Original Airdate: 04-29-10

BABIES.

LOTS of babies all the time. Real ones. Fake ones. Crying ones. Sleeping
ones. Babies and baby paraphernalia everywhere. People telling you to
shush, whispering, "Baby on the stage." Actors having babies, writers
having babies, Facebook babies, Tweets about babies... That's how it was
on the set during the filming of this episode. Not only were we filming
the story of Sloan-Cubed (That's what we called Mark Sloan's grandson),
but the night before we began shooting, Eric Dane and his lovely wife
Rebecca welcomed their baby into the world. And when we were prepping
this episode, writer-producer Stacy McKee gave birth to her beautiful
daughter Sabrina. Like I said, babies, babies everywhere.

First off, I have to let y'all (Yes, I will be using y'all -- I am from
Texas, and I just can't stop) in on an interesting tidbit of production
-- filming with live babies? Is INSANE. I mean, insane in a good way,
they're cute and do funny things for the camera, like stick out their
tongues and yawn, but also insane, as in their schedules to be allowed
on the set? Insane. Babies are allowed to be on the shooting stage for a
maximum of twenty minutes per day, and that time must fall within a two
hour window. We were lucky in that we had the amazing Spencer and
Elijah, the cutest twin baby boys that served as our Sloan-Cubed;
therefore, we actually had forty minutes of available shooting time for
those scenes. And no offense to Spencer and Elijah or all of baby-kind,
but when you want the baby actor to sleep peacefully? He cries. When you
want them to cry their guts out in a massive fit of tears? They sleep
like angels. So when we were stealing the bottle from a napping Spencer
or Elijah in order to induce tears, I'm pretty sure I felt like the
worst human being in the world.

So, Sloan Sloan's baby was delivered on Mark's living room floor. While
Teddy was pantless in Mark's dress shirt. While Owen was awkwardly
noticing a pantless Teddy in Mark's dress shirt (More to come on the
Teddy/Owen angst later). While breaking this episode in the writers'
room, we talked about a bunch of different ways we could show
Sloan-Cubed's arrival -- do we rush a laboring Sloan to Seattle Grace
and have her give birth in the ER? Do we give the birth some serious
medical medical and save both the lives of Sloan and her baby by an
awesome risky surgery? Does Addison hop on a helicopter in her trendy
heels and chopper down from LA? Do we show the ACTUAL birth?

We went with the version that aired because we really thought we wanted
a super-charged, fun, dynamic opening to the show -- I LOVE this
opening. Director Tony Phelan did an amazing job of setting up the
sequence that went from the Callie/Arizona fight to Mark screaming for
suture kits, to everyone running across the hallway and standing in the
doorway as Teddy just looks at them while holding this newborn covered
in goo.

Wait. Pause. Hi, I'm Meg, and I'm the Director of Medical Research, and
this is my very first time at writing an episode. And I'm writing to you
like you know me. Because I know you. Or, most of y'all. Or, at least
the die-hard ones that have been around for years. The bloggers. When I
first started at GREY'S, in Season 3, I was the Writers' PA, and one of
my main jobs was to read all of your comments and post them, so that the
writers could then read all of your thoughts. So every Thursday night,
after the show aired on the West coast, I would log on to this blog and
read what y'all had to say. Or type. I read and posted everything. The
good things AND the bad things. And it may sound totally weird, and I
hope I don't creep anyone out, but it really makes me happy when three
years later, I see a lot of my familiar blogging friends with their same
author names, still writing to us. So thank you, blogging-fans. For
watching, for reading, and for writing. We really appreciate it and
please keep at it. But anyway, I'm Meg, and it's nice to finally and
officially meet all of you.

So while Mark is learning how to be a dad and supporting Sloan in making
the right decision for her son's future... Callie and Arizona are
finally talking about the "baby" in the room. And literally are
interrupted by an actual baby being delivered in the other room... does
anyone else find that as funny as I do? Anyway... When Shonda told us
that this would be the episode where Callie and Arizona have the all-out
FIGHT, my first question was, well, who wins? Is it going to be baby...
or no baby? And really, how does Arizona, a PEDIATRIC surgeon really not
want kids? She obviously likes them, she's obviously great with them, I
mean, why else put herself through one of the hardest specialties in
medicine, if not? And that's what Callie doesn't understand. Callie
watches her girlfriend help deliver a baby, watches her girlfriend calm
a baby down, and watches her girlfriend insert a central line into
another baby in the NICU. All in one day. Arizona never flinches when
dealing with babies that are her patients. So in Callie's mind, there
must be a reason why Arizona doesn't want one of her own. And she
assumes it's because her brother died. And yikes, does she assume wrong.
That scene in the residents' lounge? Jessica and Sara were freaking
genius in that scene. Arizona cannot even believe Callie went to the
brother place. And we see that, Arizona really just doesn't want kids.
There is no THING that happened. There is no dark hidden story that she
can't bear to talk about. She just DOESN'T want them.

It's heartbreaking because they love each other, and they want this
relationship to work. Badly. It's heartbreaking because they want to
make each other happy, they want to meet in the middle, they want to
compromise. But what's the compromise when it comes to babies? I get it
when it's Friday night, and I'm exhausted from researching medical
medical all day, and I want to watch "Smallville" (Yes, I watch
"Smallville, I love "Smallville," and I love it proudly) but my fianc√©
obviously wants to watch some five-hour sporting event (between two
teams that have nothing to do with the state we're from OR the city we
live in). But we love each other, so we do what every bickering couple
would do... we watch "Friday Night Lights" instead. Compromise. Both of
us happy. But with Callie and Arizona? Isn't it, baby... or no baby? Can
their relationship survive if they keep having this fight?

Mer and Der. There's a relationship that's surviving and thriving. And I
know they didn't have a ton of alone time this episode. And I know that
y'all don't like that sometimes, but please remember when you're
expressing yourself on this blog about how much you don't like it, that
we will still understand your passion about the couple and how many
minutes they have together in the episode, if you could somehow use the
words freak, dang, heck, and shoot rather than their alternatives. We
completely get where you're coming from, but there's no need to shout at
our writers. Or our Writers' PA Tia, who when posting the comments,
tries to keep the language clean and friendly for all ages. And BTW,
there's nothing to shout about here. Even though April may be an adoring
young resident who thinks everything out of Derek's mouth is hilarious,
McDreamy doesn't see that. McDreamy only sees Meredith. And even though
Alex tries to break it down for her, Mer's not really threatened by
April. She knows her Post-It's all good. It sure seemed fine when she
went in to see Derek in the conference room at the end of the day...

But one relationship you'll want to keep a close eye on in the few
remaining episodes of Season 6 is the Cristina/Owen/Teddy triangle. Not
only did Owen throw Teddy under the bus with the threat of her losing
her job, but he basically lied to Cristina's face about it. I love how
Cristina's devotion to cardio is so blinding that she doesn't even fully
realize her betrayal of Teddy until that scene at the Nurses' Station
when Teddy tells her Evans is being considered as her replacement. And
then when Owen comforts her in the elevator, Teddy just breaks down.
That's such a raw moment for the two of them, and I find it so
interesting that we're really exploring the possibility of Owen maybe
being in love with two women. Undoubtedly, he is in love with Cristina.
But the fact that being that close to Teddy in that elevator sent him to
Derek's office to tell him he can pass on Teddy? Pretty significant. And
keep watching, because what Owen said to Derek will continue to be
explored next week...

... And trust me when I say, don't change the channel on Thursday nights
in the following weeks... And my heart's even beating faster as I write
this because things are happening and finales are approaching...And oh
my goodness...

And again, thank you so very much for watching, reading, and writing.

And thank you especially to Shonda, Krista, Hammer, Pete, Tony, Joan,
Zoanne, Debora, Allan, Jenna, Stacy, Bill, Austin, Star, Darren, Chris,
Miguel, Seve, Safia, Raamla, Tia, Nancy, Jess, Susan, Betsy, Rob, the
cast, and the crew. Thank you all so very, very much for giving me the
amazing opportunity to write this episode.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
